JUDY WOODRUFF: Nashville
has long been considered
the beating heart of
the country music world,
but the new album "The Nashville
Sound" by Jason Isbell is
infusing the genre with rock,
folk and blues.
The Grammy Award winner has
turned heads with his lyrics,
which this time around address
topics like poverty,
race, and love.
Jeffrey Brown recently joined
Isbell on the first stop
of his international tour.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his song
"The Last of My Kind," Jason
Isbell creates a character based
on people he grew up around
in rural Northern Alabama who
fear how the world is changing.
JASON ISBELL, Musician: A lot
of people that I grew up with,
went to school with in Alabama,
and a lot of people in my family
who told me growing up that
cities were terrible places
and anything outside of our
little circle was scary and
dangerous and frightening.
And I thought about the effect
that had on people, when you
start to believe that, and
you let yourself be so afraid
of other people and the outside
world, that you never feel
tethered, you never
feel a connection with
the rest of humanity.
So, I wrote that song
based on that kind of fear.
JEFFREY BROWN: In both ballads
and hard-charging rock 'n' roll
songs like "Cumberland Gap,"
Isbell's storytelling prowess
has made him one of today's most
acclaimed singer-songwriters.
His last album, "ÑMDNMÑSomething
More Than Free," won two
Grammys and achieved the
rare feat of topping folk, rock,
and country charts in 2015.
Now 38, he's back with a new
album titled "The Nashville
Sound," and we joined him and
his band, The 400 Unit, at
the Thomas Wolfe Auditorium in
Asheville, North Carolina, on
the first day of their
new national tour.
Once again, Isbell's
songs are filled with
rural country characters,
this time also reflecting
the nation's political
and cultural fears.
ÑMD+ITÑÑMD-ITÑÑMD+ITÑÑMD-ITÑJASON
ISBELL:
It's
just
hard
to
tell
people
who
are my family that anybody in
government really cares about
them, because I don't think I
can sell that.
I don't think I can convincingly
tell Middle America that
the government gives a damn.
JEFFREY BROWN: Disaffected
white male, yes?
JASON ISBELL: Yes.
Yes, you hear about that.
And I think a lot of people
try to tell us that that's who
elected our current president,
but I don't necessarily believe
that, because I know a lot of
disaffected white males and
disaffected white people
in general who didn't
vote at all because they
didn't think anybody
gave a damn about them.
JEFFREY BROWN: They just didn't
believe in the political system.
JASON ISBELL: No.
They thought the system had
been broken for a long time.
JEFFREY BROWN: Isbell started
out as many do, in bands that
travel by van wherever the
gigs take them.
His first big break was as a
member of the southern indie
rock band the Drive-By Truckers.
That came to an end when his
drinking and drug abuse grew
so bad, he was thrown out
of the band.
It took him several years
to sober up and restart
his life and career.
JASON ISBELL: Before I stopped
drinking, I thought, if I quit
drinking, am I still going
to be funny?
Am I still going to
be a good songwriter?
Am I going to still be
a rock 'n' roll person?
Are people going to still
want to be around me?
And then, is my creativity
going to be there if I
quit doing these drugs?
Am I going to be able
to record in the studio,
these kinds of things?
And now they sound so ridiculous
even just coming out of my
mouth, like, of course, that's
not where the work comes from.
JEFFREY BROWN: But I can
see where the anxiety
comes from, because, I
mean, in your business,
it's a thin line, isn't it,
between kind of making it and
not making it or having success
or not?
JASON ISBELL: Yes.
Yes, it's hard.
It's really hard to make a
living writing songs and singing
them, really, really hard.
A lot of people, they try it
out like as a lottery ticket.
And then, if it doesn't work,
they go do something else.
But that's not the
tradition that I come from.
I come from a group of people
who pretty much set themselves
to do this for the rest of
their life, whether
it kills them or not.
And that's how I was early on.
That's how I still am.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now he's on
the road with his wife, Amanda
Shires, herself a singer and
songwriter who performs
on her own and as
bandmate with her husband.
And they're joined by
their almost 2-year-old
"Moon Shadow"-loving
daughter, Mercy Rose.
Isbell's recent breakthrough
success allows some
newfound traveling comforts.
JASON ISBELL: We have recently
gotten to the point where
we can have multiple buses.
That's something I never really
thought that I would get to.
Maybe one bus, that'd be
great, with a trailer behind
it with our gear in it.
That was always the goal for me.
JEFFREY BROWN: This
is how you judge where
you're at, right, by...
JASON ISBELL: Oh, God, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... whether it's
a van or one bus or two buses?
JASON ISBELL: Yes.
Yes.
It's practical
concerns, you know?
Because I have always made
the art I wanted to make,
and I will always do that.
So, I'm going to judge my level
of success by whether or not
I can hear myself on stage,
or whether or not my wife can
come along with me and have
a mirror to put her makeup on
in, and my baby can have a
bunk with this, like, dog gate
that we bought at Petco and
bolted to the outside of the
bunk, so she doesn't roll off
in the middle of the night.
JEFFREY BROWN: In one beautiful
love song on the new album,
Isbell writes and sings
as himself about a future of
joy and sorrow with his wife.
JASON ISBELL: If you can write
a good love song now that
actually adds something to the
canon of love songs, then
you're qualified, in my
opinion, because that's tough.
That's like painting a picture
of a tree that needs to exists.
How many times have
people done that before?
JEFFREY BROWN: Another song
getting much attention tackles
racism in America today.
It's called "White Man's World."
JASON ISBELL: It's important
for me to just continue to
notice that there are doors that
are open for me that
wouldn't be if I wasn't
white or if I wasn't male.
I'm not guilty about it,
and I'm not ashamed of it.
I had no control over it.
And I need to consider those
things, because, if I don't,
then I'm just running wild and
never really considering what
privilege that I have and how
to make the world a better
place for people don't
get what they deserve.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jason Isbell
and The 400 Unit will tour the
nation this summer and into
the fall.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown in
Asheville, North Carolina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
as you heard, he's on
an international tour.